India , officially the Republic of India , is a country in South Asia . It is the seventh-largest country by area , the most populous country in the world and, since its independence in 1947, the world's most populous democracy. Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast, it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west; China , Nepal and Bhutan to the north; Bangladesh and Myanmar to the east. In the Indian Ocean, India is near Sri Lanka and the Maldives . Its Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with Myanmar, Thailand and Indonesia . Modern humans arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa no later than 55,000 years ago. Their long occupation, predominantly in isolation as hunter-gatherers, has made the region highly diverse. Settled life emerged on the subcontinent in the western margins of the Indus river basin 9,000 years ago, evolving gradually into the Indus Valley Civilisation of the third millennium BCE. By 1200 BCE , an archaic form of Sanskrit , an Indo-European language , had diffused into India from the northwest. Its hymns recorded the early dawnings of Hinduism in India. India's pre-existing Dravidian languages were supplanted in the northern regions. By 400 BCE , caste had emerged within Hinduism, and Buddhism and Jainism had arisen, proclaiming social orders unlinked to heredity. Early political consolidations gave rise to the loose-knit Maurya and Gupta Empires . During this era, there was a flourishing of creativity in art, architecture, and writing, the status of women declined, and untouchability became an organised belief. In South India , the Middle kingdoms exported Dravidian language scripts and religious cultures to the kingdoms of Southeast Asia . In the 1st millennium Islam , Christianity , Judaism , and Zoroastrianism became established on India's southern and western coasts. Early in the 2nd millennium Muslim armies from Central Asia intermittently overran India's northern plains. The resulting Delhi Sultanate drew northern India into the cosmopolitan networks of medieval Islam . In south India, the Vijayanagara Empire created a long-lasting composite Hindu culture. In the Punjab , Sikhism emerged, rejecting institutionalised religion. The Mughal Empire ushered in two centuries of economic expansion and relative peace, and left a rich architectural legacy . Gradually expanding rule of the British East India Company turned India into a colonial economy but consolidated its sovereignty . British Crown rule began in 1858. The rights promised to Indians were granted slowly, but technological changes were introduced, and modern ideas of education and the public life took root. A nationalist movement emerged in India, the first in the non-European British Empire and an influence on other nationalist movements. Noted for nonviolent resistance after 1920, it became the primary factor in ending British rule. In 1947, the British Indian Empire was partitioned into two independent dominions , a Hindu-majority dominion of India and a Muslim-majority dominion of Pakistan . A large-scale loss of life and an unprecedented migration accompanied the partition. India has been a federal republic since 1950, governed through a democratic parliamentary system . It is a pluralistic , multilingual and multi-ethnic society . India's population grew from 361 million in 1951 to over 1.4 billion in 2023. During this time, its nominal per capita income increased from US$64 annually to US$2,601, and its literacy rate from 16.6% to 74%. The Indian economy has since become a fast-growing major economy and a hub for information technology , with an expanding middle class. India has reduced its poverty rate , though at the cost of increasing economic inequality. It is a nuclear-weapon state that ranks high in military expenditure . It has disputes over Kashmir with its neighbours, Pakistan and China, unresolved since the mid-20th century. Among the socio-economic challenges India faces are gender inequality , child malnutrition , and rising levels of air pollution . India's land is megadiverse with four biodiversity hotspots . India's wildlife , which has traditionally been viewed with tolerance in its culture , is supported in protected habitats . Etymology According to the Oxford English Dictionary , the English proper noun "India" derives most immediately from the Classical Latin India , a reference to a loosely-defined historical region of Asia stretching from South Asia to the borders of China. Further etymons are: Hellenistic Greek India ( Ἰνδία ); Ancient Greek Indos ( Ἰνδός ), or the River Indus ; Achaemenian Old Persian Hindu (an eastern province of the Achaemenid Empire ); and Sanskrit Sindhu , or "river," but specifically the Indus river, and by extension its well-settled basin. The Ancient Greeks referred to South Asians as Indoi , 'the people of the Indus'. The term Bharat ( Bhārat ; pronounced ⓘ ), mentioned in both Indian epic poetry and the Constitution of India , is used in its variations by many Indian languages . A modern rendering of the historical name Bharatavarsha , which applied originally to North India , Bharat gained increased currency from the mid-19th century as a native name for India. Hindustan ( ⓘ ) is a Middle Persian name for India that became popular by the 13th century, and was used widely since the era of the Mughal Empire . The meaning of Hindustan has varied, referring to a region encompassing the northern Indian subcontinent (present-day northern India and Pakistan ) or to India in its near entirety. History Ancient India Based on coalescence of Mitochondrial DNA and Y Chromosome data, it is thought that the earliest extant lineages of anatomically modern humans or Homo sapiens on the Indian subcontinent had reached there from Africa between 80,000 and 50,000 years ago, and with high likelihood by 55,000 years ago. Their long occupation, initially in varying forms of isolation as hunter-gatherers, has made the region highly diverse, second only to Africa in human genetic diversity . However, the earliest known modern human fossils in South Asia date to about 30,000 years ago. Evidence for the neolithic period in the western margins of the Indus river basin , at Mehrgarh in Balochistan, Pakistan , dates to after 7000 BCE . Domestication of grain-producing plants (including barley ) and animals (including humped zebu cattle) occurred here. These cultures gradually evolved into the Indus Valley Civilisation , which flourished during 2500–1900 BCE in Pakistan and western India. Centred around cities such as Mohenjo-daro , Harappa , Dholavira , Ganweriwala , and Rakhigarhi , its characteristic features included standardised weights, steatite seals , a written script, urban planning, public works, and arts and crafts including pottery styles, terracotta human figures and animal statuettes. Networks of towns and villages grew around the cities in a new agro - pastoral economy. Between 1500 BCE and 1200 BCE , an archaic form of Sanskrit , an Indo-European language , diffused into India from the northwest. Its evidence today is found in the Rig Veda —the oldest scripture associated with what later became Hinduism —which was composed by Indo-Aryan -speaking tribes migrating east from what is today northern Afghanistan and across the Punjab region . The settling of the Ganges river plain took place during the next millennium, when large swathes of the river system's adjoining regions were deforested, at times by setting fires, or later by employing iron implements, and prepared for agriculture. The settlement may have involved driving the preexisting people out or enslaving them. The Dravidian languages of India were supplanted in the north, creating a broad language family -divide, with the Indo-Aryan languages being spoken mainly in the north and west , and the Dravidian in some parts of east India and most of the south . Classical Sanskrit , a refined and standardised grammatical form would emerge in the mid-1st millennium BCE and was codified in the Aṣṭādhyāyī ('Eight chapters') of Pāṇini . The two major Sanskrit epics, the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa , however, were composed in a range of oral storytelling registers called Epic Sanskrit which was used in northern India between 400 BCE and 300 CE, and roughly contemporary with classical Sanskrit. A second urbanisation had taken place in South Asia by 400 BCE , this time on the Ganges plain. In fortified cities, social differentiation by caste , or varna , had emerged. By the mid-millennium two new ethical and social systems had arisen: Jainism based on the teachings of Mahavira and Buddhism on those of the Buddha . Both religions stressed non-violence and abjured animal sacrifices conducted in Brahmanism , and birth into a fixed hereditary varna . By living ethically, lay people could rise socially and morally in these religions. Chronicling the life of the Buddha was central to the beginnings of recorded history in India. The rise of the two religions was a backdrop to the emergence of the first loose-knit geographically extensive power in South Asia, the Maurya Empire . During the rule of the founder's grandson, Ashoka (ca. 268–232 BCE), the empire briefly controlled the major urban hubs and arteries of the subcontinent, except in the deep south. The empire's period was notable for creativity in art, architecture, inscriptions, and produced texts, but also for the declining rights of women in the mainstream Indo-Aryan speaking regions. Following his conquest of Kalinga , in which his forces caused immense loss of life, Ashoka adopted Buddhism , subsequently adopting a policy of dhamma and commissioning numerous rock and pillar edicts throughout the Maurya Empire to promote ethical conduct, non-violence, and social welfare. As the edicts forbade both the killing of wild animals and the destruction of forests, Ashoka is seen by some modern environmental historians as an early embodiment of that ethos. By the 4th and 5th centuries, the Gupta Empire had created a complex system of administration and taxation in the greater Ganges Plain; this system became a model for later Indian kingdoms. Under the Guptas, a renewed Hinduism based on devotion, rather than the management of ritual, began to assert itself. The renewal was reflected in a flowering of art, literature, and science. In South India, the Sangam literature of the Tamil language reveals that, between 200 BCE and 200 CE , the southern peninsula was ruled by the Cheras and the Cholas , along the western and eastern plains, respectively, of the Kaveri river valley, and the Pandyas farther south along the Vaigai river valley. By the sixth century, the Pallavas had grown into a regional power. Simultaneously, Buddhism and Jainism, which had favoured a conservative transactionalism , were replaced by kingly devotion to the gods of particular places, which became a characteristic of the Bhakti movement . The Pallavas, in particular, traded extensively with the Roman Empire and with West and Southeast Asia . Medieval India The Indian early medieval age, from 600 to 1200 CE , was defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity. No ruler of this period was able to create an empire and consistently control lands much beyond their core region. During this time, pastoral peoples, whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy, were accommodated within caste society, as were new non-traditional ruling classes. The caste system consequently began to show regional differences. In the 6th and 7th centuries, the first devotional hymns were composed in Tamil. They were imitated all over India and led to both the resurgence of Hinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent . Indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised drew citizens in significant numbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well. Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as India underwent another urbanisation. By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effects were felt in Southeast Asia, as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day Myanmar , Thailand , Laos , Brunei , Cambodia , Vietnam , Philippines , Malaysia , and Indonesia . Indian merchants, scholars, and sometimes armies were involved in this transmission; Southeast Asians took the initiative as well, with many sojourning in Indian seminaries and translating Buddhist and Hindu texts into their languages. After the 10th century, Muslim Central Asian nomadic clans, using swift-horse cavalry and raising vast armies united by ethnicity, repeatedly overran South Asia's north-western plains, leading eventually to the establishment of the Islamic Delhi Sultanate in 1206. The sultanate was to control much of North India and to make many forays into South India. Although at first disruptive for the Indian elites, the sultanate largely left its vast non-Muslim subject population to its own laws and customs. By repeatedly repulsing Mongol raiders in the 13th century, the sultanate saved India from the devastation visited on West and Central Asia, setting the scene for centuries of migration of fleeing soldiers, learned men, mystics, traders, artists, and artisans from that region into the subcontinent, thereby creating a syncretic Indo-Islamic culture in the north. The sultanate's raiding and weakening of the regional kingdoms of South India paved the way for the indigenous Vijayanagara Empire . Embracing a strong Shaivite tradition and building upon the military technology of the sultanate, the empire came to control a large portion of peninsular India, and was to influence South Indian society for long afterwards. Early modern India In the early 16th century, northern India, then under mainly Muslim rulers, fell again to the superior mobility and firepower of a new generation of Central Asian warriors. The resulting Mughal Empire did not stamp out the local societies it came to rule. Instead, it balanced and pacified them through new administrative practices and diverse and inclusive ruling elites, leading to more systematic, centralised, and uniform rule. Eschewing tribal bonds and Islamic identity, especially under Akbar , the Mughals united their far-flung realms through loyalty—expressed through a Persianised culture—to an emperor who had near-divine status. The Mughal state's economic policies, deriving most revenues from agriculture and mandating that taxes be paid in the well-regulated silver currency, caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets. The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India's economic expansion, resulting in greater patronage of painting , literary forms, textiles, and architecture . Newly coherent social groups in northern and western India, such as the Marathas , the Rajputs , and the Sikhs , gained military and governing ambitions during Mughal rule, which, through collaboration or adversity, gave them both recognition and military experience. Expanding commerce during Mughal rule gave rise to new Indian commercial and political elites along the coasts of southern and eastern India. The incremental fragmentation of imperial authority during the late 17th and 18th centuries facilitated a process of decentralisation, enabling provincial elites to assert localised autonomy and consolidate control over their own affairs. By the early 18th century, with the lines between commercial enterprise and political sovereignty increasingly blurred, European chartered companies—notably the English East India Company —solidified their presence through fortified coastal outposts. The East India Company's control of the seas, greater resources, and more advanced military training and technology led it to assert its military strength increasingly and caused it to become attractive to a portion of the Indian elite; these factors were crucial in allowing the company to gain control over the Bengal region by 1765 and sideline the other European companies. Its further access to the riches of Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annexe or subdue most of India by the 1820s. India was no longer exporting manufactured goods as it long had, but instead supplying the British Empire with raw materials. Many historians consider this to be the onset of India's colonial period. By this time, with its economic power severely curtailed by the British parliament and having effectively been made an arm of British administration, the East India Company began more consciously to enter non-economic arenas, including education, social reform, and culture. Modern India The appointment in 1848 of Lord Dalhousie as Governor General of the East India Company set the stage for changes essential to a modern state: the consolidation and demarcation of sovereignty, the surveillance of the population, and the education of citizens. Technological changes—among them, railways, canals, and the telegraph—were introduced not long after their introduction in Europe . Disaffection with the company also grew during this time and set off the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . Fed by diverse resentments and perceptions, including invasive British-style social reforms, harsh land taxes, and summary treatment of some wealthy landowners and princes, the rebellion rocked many regions of northern and central India and shook the foundations of Company rule. After the rebellion was suppressed in 1858, the East India Company was disbanded, and the British government began to directly administer India . Proclaiming a unitary state and a gradual but limited British-style parliamentary system, the new rulers also protected princes and landed gentry as a feudal safeguard against future unrest. In the decades following, public life gradually emerged across India, eventually leading to the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885. The rush of technology and the commercialisation of agriculture in the second half of the 19th century was marked by economic setbacks, and many small farmers became dependent on the whims of faraway markets. There was an increase in the number of large-scale famines , and, despite the risks of infrastructure development borne by Indian taxpayers, little industrial employment was generated for Indians. However, commercial cropping, especially in the newly canalled Punjab, led to increased food production for internal consumption. The railway network provided critical famine relief, notably reduced the cost of moving goods, and helped nascent Indian-owned industry. After World War I , in which more than 1.3 million Indians served , the Gandhian era began. It was marked by British reforms but also repressive legislation , by more strident Indian calls for self-rule, and by the beginnings of a nonviolent movement of non-co-operation led by Mahatma Gandhi . During the 1930s, the British enacted slow legislative reform; the Indian National Congress won victories in the resulting elections. The next decade was beset with crises: Indian participation in World War II , the Congress's final push for non-co-operation, and an upsurge of Muslim nationalism . All were capped by the advent of independence in 1947, but tempered by the partition of India into two states: India and Pakistan. India's constitution was adopted in 1950 and established a secular, democratic republic. Economic liberalisation has created a large urban middle class and transformed India into a fast growing economy . However, India has been hamstrung by persistent poverty, both rural and urban; religious - and caste-related violence ; Maoist-inspired Naxalite insurgencies ; and separatism in Jammu and Kashmir and in Northeast India . India has unresolved territorial disputes with China and with Pakistan . Geography India accounts for the bulk of the Indian subcontinent, lying atop the Indian tectonic plate , and a part of the Indo-Australian Plate . India's defining geologic processes began approximately 70 million years ago, when the Indian Plate, then part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana , began a north-eastward drift caused by seafloor spreading to its south-west, and later, south and south-east. Simultaneously, the vast Tethyan oceanic crust , to its northeast, began to subduct under the Eurasian Plate . The Indian continental crust , however, was obstructed and was sheared horizontally. Its lower crust and mantle slid under, but the upper layer piled up in sheets (or nappes ) ahead of the subduction zone. This created the orogeny , or process of mountain building, of the Himalayas. The middle and stiffer layer continued to push into Tibet, causing crustal thickening of the Tibetan Plateau . Immediately south of the emerging Himalayas, plate movement created a vast crescent-shaped trough that rapidly filled with river-borne sediment and now constitutes the Indo-Gangetic Plain . The original Indian plate makes its first appearance above the sediment in the ancient Aravalli range , which extends from the Delhi Ridge in a southwesterly direction. To the west lies the Thar Desert , the eastern spread of which is checked by the Aravallis. The remaining Indian Plate survives as peninsular India , the oldest and geologically most stable part of India. It extends as far north as the Satpura and Vindhya ranges in central India. These parallel chains run from the Arabian Sea coast in Gujarat in the west to the coal-rich Chota Nagpur Plateau in Jharkhand in the east. To the south, the remaining peninsular landmass, the Deccan Plateau , is flanked on the west and east by coastal ranges known as the Western and Eastern Ghats ; the plateau contains the country's oldest rock formations, some over one billion years old. Constituted in such fashion, India lies to the north of the equator between 6° 44′ and 35° 30′ north latitude and 68° 7′ and 97° 25′ east longitude. Major Himalayan-origin rivers that substantially flow through India include the Ganges and the Brahmaputra , both of which drain into the Bay of Bengal . Important tributaries of the Ganges include the Yamuna and the Kosi . The Kosi's extremely low gradient, caused by long-term silt deposition, leads to severe floods and course changes. Major peninsular rivers, whose steeper gradients prevent their waters from flooding, include the Godavari , the Mahanadi , the Kaveri , and the Krishna , which also drain into the Bay of Bengal; and the Narmada and the Tapti , which drain into the Arabian Sea . India's coastline measures 7,517 kilometres (4,700 mi) in length; of this distance, 5,423 kilometres (3,400 mi) belong to peninsular India and 2,094 kilometres (1,300 mi) to the Andaman, Nicobar, and Lakshadweep island chains. According to the Indian naval hydrographic charts, the mainland coastline consists of the following: 43% sandy beaches; 11% rocky shores, including cliffs; and 46% mudflats or marshy shores. Coastal features include the marshy Rann of Kutch of western India and the alluvial Sundarbans delta of eastern India; the latter is shared with Bangladesh. India has two archipelagos : the Lakshadweep coral atolls off India's south-western coast; and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a volcanic chain in the Andaman Sea . India has 28 states and 8 union territories . Climate The Indian climate is strongly influenced by the Himalayas and the Thar Desert, both of which drive the economically and culturally pivotal summer and winter monsoons . The Himalayas prevent cold Central Asian katabatic winds from blowing in, keeping the bulk of the Indian subcontinent warmer than most locations at similar latitudes. The Thar Desert plays a crucial role in attracting the moisture-laden south-west summer monsoon winds that, between June and October, provide the majority of India's rainfall. Four major climatic groupings predominate in India: tropical wet , tropical dry , subtropical humid , and montane . Temperatures in India have risen by 0.7 °C (1.3 °F) between 1901 and 2018. Climate change in India is often thought to be the cause. The retreat of Himalayan glaciers has adversely affected the flow rate of the major Himalayan rivers, including the Ganges and the Brahmaputra . According to some current projections, the number and severity of droughts in India will have markedly increased by the end of the present century. Biodiversity India is a megadiverse country , a term employed for 17 countries that host high biological diversity and contain many species indigenous , or endemic , to them. India is the habitat for 8.6% of all mammals , 13.7% of bird species, 7.9% of reptile species, 6% of amphibian species, 12.2% of fish species, and 6.0% of all flowering plant species. Fully a third of Indian plant species are endemic. India also overlaps four of the world's 34 biodiversity hotspots , or regions that display significant habitat loss in the presence of high endemism. India's most dense forests, such as the tropical moist forest of the Andaman Islands , the Western Ghats , and Northeast India , occupy approximately 3% of its land area. Moderately dense forest , whose canopy density is between 40% and 70%, occupies 9.39% of India's land area. It predominates in the temperate coniferous forest of the Himalayas , the moist deciduous sal forest of eastern India, and the dry deciduous teak forest of central and southern India. India has two natural zones of thorn forest , one in the Deccan Plateau , immediately east of the Western Ghats, and the other in the western part of the Indo-Gangetic plain, now turned into rich agricultural land by irrigation, its features no longer visible. Among the Indian subcontinent's notable indigenous trees are the astringent Azadirachta indica , or neem , which is widely used in rural Indian herbal medicine , and the luxuriant Ficus religiosa , or peepul , which is displayed on the ancient seals of Mohenjo-daro , and under which the Buddha is recorded in the Pali canon to have sought enlightenment. Many Indian species have descended from those of Gondwana , the southern supercontinent from which India separated more than 100 million years ago. India's subsequent collision with Eurasia set off a mass exchange of species. However, volcanism and climatic changes later caused the extinction of many endemic Indian forms. Still later, mammals entered India from Asia through two zoogeographic passes flanking the Himalayas. This lowered endemism among India's mammals, which stands at 12.6%, contrasting with 45.8% among reptiles and 55.8% among amphibians. Among endemics are the vulnerable hooded leaf monkey and the threatened Beddome's toad of the Western Ghats. India contains 172 IUCN -designated threatened animal species , or 2.9% of endangered forms. These include the endangered Bengal tiger and the Ganges river dolphin . Critically endangered species include the gharial , a crocodilian ; the great Indian bustard ; and the Indian white-rumped vulture , which has become nearly extinct by having ingested the carrion of diclofenac -treated cattle. Before they were extensively used for agriculture and cleared for human settlement, the thorn forests of Punjab were mingled at intervals with open grasslands that were grazed by large herds of blackbuck preyed on by the Asiatic cheetah ; the blackbuck, no longer extant in Punjab, is now severely endangered in India, and the cheetah is extinct. The pervasive and ecologically devastating human encroachment of recent decades has critically endangered Indian wildlife. In response, the system of national parks and protected areas , first established in 1935, was expanded substantially. In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act and Project Tiger to safeguard crucial wilderness; the Forest Conservation Act was enacted in 1980 and amendments added in 1988. India hosts more than five hundred wildlife sanctuaries and eighteen biosphere reserves , four of which are part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves ; its eighty-nine wetlands are registered under the Ramsar Convention . Government and politics Politics India is a parliamentary republic with a multi-party system . There are six recognised national parties in the country, including the Indian National Congress (generally, "the Congress") and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP); there are over 50 regional parties . The Congress is considered the ideological centre in Indian political culture ; the BJP is right-wing to far-right . After India's independence on August 15, 1947, Jawaharlal Nehru became prime minister of the Dominion of India , an office he held until January 26, 1950, when India became a republic; Nehru remained the caretaker prime minister until the following year. In the general elections in 1951 , 1957 , and 1962 , the Congress, led by Nehru, won by comfortable margins. After Nehru died in office in May 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri was unanimously chosen by the Congress to be parliamentary leader, and thus prime minister. After the India–Pakistan war of 1965 , Shastri died in January 1966, soon after signing the Tashkent Peace Declaration . The Congress chose Indira Gandhi to be prime minister. She led the party to election victories in 1967 and 1971 , the latter a landslide after Pakistan's defeat in the Bangladesh Liberation War . In 1975, Indira Gandhi declared a state of emergency , suspending many civil liberties. Following public discontent with the Emergency, the Congress was voted out of power in 1977 ; Janata Party , which had opposed the Emergency, was voted in. Its government lasted two years; Morarji Desai and Charan Singh served as prime ministers. The Congress returned to power in 1980. After a military operation against Sikh militants occupying the Golden Temple in Amritsar , Indira Gandhi was assassinated by a Sikh bodyguard on October 31, 1984. She was succeeded as prime minister by Rajiv Gandhi , who led Congress to a comfortable victory in the elections at the end of the year. In 1989, a National Front coalition, led by the Janata Dal , in alliance with the Left Front , won the general elections . The subsequent government lasted just under two years; V. P. Singh and Chandra Shekhar served as prime ministers. In 1991, soon after the first round of polling in the general election , Congress leader Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated by a member of a Sri Lankan Tamil separatist organisation who was seeking to avenge Indian intervention in the Sri Lankan civil war . After the elections, Congress emerged as the largest single party; a new Congress leader, P. V. Narasimha Rao , formed a minority government which served a full five-year term. In 1996, the BJP briefly formed a government after winning the general election . United Front coalition governments followed, which relied on external political support, H. D. Deve Gowda and I. K. Gujral serving as prime ministers. After the 1998 Indian general election , Atal Bihari Vajpayee of the BJP became prime minister; his government was short-lived due to the lack of a continued mandate. Elections were held again in 1999 . The BJP, now a part of the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), formed a coalition government led by Vajpayee, who became the first non-Congress prime minister to complete a five-year term. In the 2004 general election , the NDA was defeated. Congress emerged as the largest single party and formed a coalition, the United Progressive Alliance (UPA). Manmohan Singh , a Sikh, who was proposed by Congress President Sonia Gandhi to be parliamentary leader, served as prime minister of the UPA government, but with some external support. The UPA returned to power in the 2009 general election with increased numbers, no longer dependent on external support. Singh became the first prime minister to be re-elected after Jawaharlal Nehru in 1962. In the 2014 general election , the BJP under Narendra Modi became the first political party since 1984 to win an absolute majority. The party won a larger majority in the 2019 general election . After losing its majority in the 2024 general election , the BJP formed a coalition government with its NDA partners. Modi is the longest-serving non-Congress prime minister. Democratic backsliding was found by the 2026 V-Dem Democracy Report . Government The Constitution of India was drafted by the Constituent Assembly of India with uncommon speed and absence of irregularities between 1946 and 1949. The Government of India Act 1935 was used as a model and framework. Long passages from the Act were included. The constitution describes a federal state with a parliamentary system of democracy. The federal structure was conspicuous for the strength of the central government, which exclusively exercised control of defence, foreign affairs, railways, ports, and currency. The President, the constitutional head of state, has reserve powers for taking over the administration of a state. The central legislature has two houses: the Lok Sabha , whose delegates are directly elected by the people in general elections every five years, and the Rajya Sabha , whose members are nominated by the elected representatives in the states. There are also features not to be found in the Act of 1935. The definition of fundamental rights is based on the Constitution of the United States , and the constitutional directives, or goals of endeavor, are based on the Constitution of Ireland . An Indian institution recommended by the constitution is the panchayat or village committees. Untouchability is illegal (Article 17) and caste distinctions are derecognized (Articles 15(2) and 16(2)). The promulgation of the Indian constitution transformed India into a republic within the Commonwealth. The prime minister of India is the head of government and exercises most executive power . Appointed by the president, the prime minister is supported by the party or political alliance with a majority of seats in the lower house of parliament. The executive of the Indian government consists of the president, the vice-president , and the Union Council of Ministers —with the cabinet being its executive committee—headed by the prime minister. Any minister holding a portfolio must be a member of one of the houses of parliament. In the Indian parliamentary system, the executive is subordinate to the legislature; the prime minister and their council are directly responsible to the lower house of the parliament. Civil servants act as permanent executives and all decisions of the executive are implemented by them. India has a three-tier unitary independent judiciary comprising the supreme court , headed by the Chief Justice of India , 25 high courts , and a large number of trial courts. The supreme court has original jurisdiction over cases involving fundamental rights and over disputes between states and the centre and has appellate jurisdiction over the high courts. It has the power to both strike down union or state laws which contravene the constitution and invalidate any government action it deems unconstitutional. Administrative divisions India is a federal union comprising 28 states and 8 union territories . All states, as well as the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir , Puducherry and the National Capital Territory of Delhi , have elected legislatures and governments following the Westminster system . The remaining five union territories are directly ruled by the central government through appointed administrators. In 1956, under the States Reorganisation Act , states were reorganised on a linguistic basis. There are over a quarter of a million local government bodies at city, town, district, block and village levels. Andhra Pradesh Arunachal Pradesh Assam Bihar Chhattisgarh Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Sikkim Tamil Nadu Telangana Tripura Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand West Bengal Andaman and Nicobar Islands Chandigarh Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu Jammu and Kashmir Ladakh Lakshadweep National Capital Territory of Delhi Puducherry Foreign relations India remained a member of the Commonwealth of Nations after becoming a republic in 1950. It strongly supported decolonisation in Africa and Asia in the 1950s, and played a leading role in the Non-Aligned Movement. After cordial relations with China during the greater part of the 1950s, India and China went to war in 1962 ; India was widely thought to have been decisively defeated. By 1967, however, India was able to fend off Chinese excursions into Sikkim . India has had uneasy relations with its western neighbour, Pakistan. The two went to war in 1947 , 1965 , 1971 , and 1999 . Three wars were fought over the disputed territory of Kashmir . After the 1965 war, India began to pursue close military and economic ties with the Soviet Union . By the late 1960s, the Soviet Union was India's largest arms supplier. China's nuclear test of 596 and threats to intervene in support of Pakistan in the 1965 war caused India to produce nuclear weapons. India conducted its first nuclear weapons test in 1974 and carried out additional underground testing in 1998. India has signed neither the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty nor the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty , considering both to be flawed and discriminatory. India maintains a " no first use " nuclear policy and is developing a nuclear triad capability as a part of its " Minimum Credible Deterrence " doctrine. Since the end of the Cold War , India has increased its economic, strategic, and military cooperation with the United States and the European Union . In 2008, a civilian nuclear agreement was signed between India and the United States. Although India possessed nuclear weapons at the time and was not a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, it received waivers from the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Suppliers Group , ending earlier restrictions on India's nuclear technology and commerce; India subsequently signed co-operation agreements involving civilian nuclear energy with Russia, France, the United Kingdom , and Canada . Economy The Indian economy has been among the ten largest economies in the world since 2010. As of 2026, Indian gross domestic output (GDP) have placed the nation as the 6th largest economy in the world . Measured by purchasing power parity (PPP), India is the third-largest economy. It is one of the world's fastest-growing economies with an average annual growth rate exceeding 5% from 1990 to 2010. Demographics strain its economy, with the nation historically maintaining low GDP per capita both regionally and as measured by globally. The vast majority of Indians fall into the global low-income group based on average daily income. Until 1991, all Indian governments followed protectionist policies that were influenced by socialist economics. Widespread state intervention and regulation largely walled the economy off from the outside world. An acute balance of payments crisis in 1991 forced the nation to liberalise its economy ; since then, it has moved increasingly towards a free-market system by emphasising both foreign trade and direct investment inflows. India has been a member of World Trade Organization since 1 January 1995. The 522-million-worker Indian labour force is the world's second largest , as of 2017 . The service sector makes up 55.6% of GDP, the industrial sector 26.3% and the agricultural sector 18.1%. India's foreign exchange remittances of US$100 billion in 2022, the highest in the world, were contributed to its economy by 32 million Indians working in foreign countries. In 2006, the share of external trade in India's GDP stood at 24%, up from 6% in 1985. In 2008, India's share of world trade was 1.6%; in 2021, it was the world's ninth-largest importer and the sixteenth-largest exporter . Between 2001 and 2011, the contribution of petrochemical and engineering goods to total exports grew from 14% to 42%. India was the world's second-largest textile exporter after China in the 2013 calendar year. Averaging an economic growth rate of 7.5% for several years before 2007, India has more than doubled its hourly wage rates during the first decade of the 21st century. Some 431 million Indians have left poverty since 1985; India's middle classes are projected to number around 580 million by 2030. In 2024, India's consumer market was the world's third largest . India's nominal GDP per capita increased steadily from US$308 in 1991, when economic liberalisation began, to US$1,380 in 2010, to an estimated US$2,731 in 2024. It is expected to grow to US$3,264 by 2026. Industries The Indian automotive industry , the world's second-fastest growing, increased domestic sales by 26% during 2009–2010, and exports by 36% during 2008–2009. In 2022, India became the world's third-largest vehicle market after China and the United States, surpassing Japan. At the end of 2011, the Indian IT industry employed 2.8 million professionals, generated revenues close to US$100 billion equalling 7.5% of Indian GDP, and contributed 26% of India's merchandise exports. The pharmaceutical industry in India includes 3,000 pharmaceutical companies and 10,500 manufacturing units; India is the world's third-largest pharmaceutical producer, largest producer of generic medicines, and supplies up to 50–60% of global vaccines demand, contributing up to US$ 24.44 billion in exports. India's local pharmaceutical market is estimated up to US$ 42 billion. India is among the top 12 biotech destinations in the world. The Indian biotech industry grew by 15.1% in 2012–2013, increasing its revenues from ₹ 204.4 billion ( Indian rupees ) to ₹ 235.24 billion (US$3.94 billion at June 2013 exchange rates). India's capacity to generate electrical power is 300 gigawatts, of which 42 gigawatts is renewable. The country's usage of coal is a major cause of India's greenhouse gas emissions , but its renewable energy is growing. India emits about 7% of global greenhouse gas emissions. This equates to about 2.5 tons of carbon dioxide per person per year, which is half the world average. Increasing access to electricity and clean cooking with liquefied petroleum gas have been priorities for energy in India. Demographics With an estimated 1,428,627,663 residents in 2023, India is the world's most populous country. 1,210,193,422 residents were reported in the 2011 provisional census report . The median age was 28.7 in 2020. Medical advances made in the last 50 years as well as increased agricultural productivity brought about by the " Green Revolution " have caused India's population to grow rapidly, though India's decennial rates of growth are decreasing: its population grew by 17.64% from 2001 to 2011, compared to 21.54% growth in the previous decade (1991–2001). The first post-colonial census, conducted in 1951, counted 361 million people. The life expectancy at birth has increased from 49.7 years in 1970–1975 to 72.0 years in 2023. The under-five mortality rate for the country was 113 per 1,000 live births in 1994 whereas in 2018 it reduced to 41.1 per 1,000 live births. The human sex ratio, according to the 2011 census, is 940 females per 1,000 males. Female infanticide in India , and lately female foeticide , have created lop-sided gender ratios; the number of missing women in the country quadrupled from 15 million to 63 million during the period 1964–2014, faster than the population growth during the same period. According to an Indian government study, an additional 21 million girls are unwanted and do not receive adequate care. Despite a government ban on sex-selective foeticide, the practice has far from stopped. Migration from rural to urban areas has been an important dynamic in India's recent history. The number of people living in urban areas grew by 31.2% between 1991 and 2001. In 2001, over 70% lived in rural areas. The level of urbanisation increased further from 27.81% in the 2001 census to 31.16% in the 2011 census. The slowing down of the overall population growth rate was due to the sharp decline in the growth rate in rural areas since 1991. In the 2011 census, there were 53 million-plus urban agglomerations in India . Among them Mumbai , Delhi , Kolkata , Chennai , Bengaluru , Hyderabad and Ahmedabad , in decreasing order by population. Languages Languages of India belong to several language families . The 2011 Census of India , the last conducted by the Indian government, gives the following breakdown: There are also small numbers of speakers of Tai–Kadai , Andamanese , and minor language families and isolates . The official language of India's federal government was chosen by the Constituent Assembly of India in September 1949 after three years of debate between two opposing camps. Hindi language protagonists wanted Hindi in the Devanagari script to be the sole "national language" of India whereas delegates from South India preferred English to have a place in the Constitution. The compromise reached declared (i) Hindi to be the "official language" of India's federal government; (ii) English to be an associate official language for 15 years during which Hindi's formal lexicon would be developed; and (iii) the international form of Hindu–Arabic numerals to be the official numerals. The compromise resolution became articles 343–351 of India's constitution, which came into effect on 26 January 1950. In 1965, after bitter opposition from South India to Hindi becoming the sole official language, a compromise was reached to where English would continue to be an "associate official language" indefinitely. The Eighth Schedule of India's Constitution also recognises 22 languages, including Hindi but not English, which the government is obligated to develop. These are sometimes called "scheduled languages". This list includes major regional languages, but also others—such as Sanskrit , which no longer has first language speakers in India, and Urdu , which is not region-specific—because of their value to India's cultural heritage. In 1950, there were 14 scheduled languages: Assamese , Bengali , Gujarati , Hindi , Kannada , Kashmiri , Malayalam , Marathi , Oriya , Punjabi , Sanskrit, Tamil , Telugu and Urdu. In the following decades constitutional amendments added others: Sindhi (1967), Nepali , Manipuri , and Konkani (1992), Maithili , Dogri , Santali and Bodo (2004). Religion Religion in India is characterised by a diversity of beliefs and practices. Throughout India's history, religion has been an important part of its culture. The Indian subcontinent is the birthplace of four major world religions : Buddhism , Hinduism , Jainism , and Sikhism . India has the largest population of Hindus, Sikhs, and Jains, the third-largest population of Muslims (after Indonesia and Pakistan ) and the ninth largest of Buddhists. India also has the largest population of people adhering to both Zoroastrianism ( Parsis and Iranis ) and the Bahá'í Faith . The Preamble to the Constitution of India declares India to be a secular state , and freedom of religion to be a fundamental right ("... liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith, and worship.") According to the 2011 census of India, 79.8% of the population of India follows Hinduism , 14.2% Islam , 2.3% Christianity , 1.7% Sikhism , 0.7% Buddhism and 0.4% Jainism . Several tribal religions are also present in India, such as Donyi-Polo , Sanamahism , Sarnaism , and Niamtre . Education The literacy rate in 2011 was 74.04%: 65.46% among females and 82.14% among males. The rural-urban literacy gap, which was 21.2 percentage points in 2001, dropped to 16.1 percentage points in 2011. The improvement in the rural literacy rate is twice that of urban areas. In 2011 Kerala had the highest literary rate, with 93.91% literacy, and Bihar the lowest, with 63.82%. In 1981 the respective literacy rates for total population, men and women were 41%, 53% and 29%. In 1951, the rates were 18%, 27% and 9%. In 1921, the rates 7%, 12% and 2%. In 1891, they were 5%, 9% and 1%. According to Latika Chaudhary, in 1911 there were under three primary schools for every ten villages. Statistically, more caste and religious diversity reduced private spending. Primary schools taught literacy, so local diversity limited its growth. The education system of India is the world's second-largest. India has over 900 universities, 40,000 colleges and 1.5 million schools. In India's higher education system, a significant number of seats are reserved under affirmative action policies for the historically disadvantaged. In recent decades India's improved education system is often cited as one of the main contributors to its economic development . Health India bears a disproportionately large burden of the world's tuberculosis rates, with World Health Organization (WHO) statistics for 2022 estimating 2.8 million new infections annually, accounting for 26% of the global total. It is estimated that approximately 40% of the population of India carry tuberculosis infection. In 2018 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was the leading cause of death after heart disease . The 10 most polluted cities in the world are all in India with more than 140 million people breathing air 10 times or more over the WHO safe limit. As of 2026, air quality reports show that not a single Indian city meets the WHO's safety guidelines. In cities like Delhi and Mumbai, breathing the air is equivalent to smoking 30 cigarettes a day. In 2017, air pollution killed 1.24 million Indians. Culture Society Although sometimes applied to other cultures and religions, caste is a uniquely Indian, and Hindu, social institution. All Hindus fall broadly into four castes, or varnas : Brahmin , or priests, at the top; below them Kshatriya , or warriors; further below, Vaishya , or merchants and farmers; and at the bottom, Shudra , or the service class. Outside the caste system, and therefore of traditional Hinduism, lie people formerly called "outcastes" or "untouchables," and now scheduled caste (a term used in India's constitution) or Dalit , a later self-description of pride, meaning "broken" or "downtrodden". Each caste is further divided into sub-castes, or jatis , many of which are tied to occupations. The custom of endogamy , or marrying within one's subcaste, however, makes caste a hereditary label, not of one occupational choice, and has caused the caste system, therefore, to become entrenched. The Constituent Assembly of India abolished untouchability in 1947, the Republic of India did more formally in 1950, and India has since enacted other anti-discriminatory laws and social welfare initiatives related to caste. Still, caste-based inequality, discrimination, segregation, and violence persist. Multi-generational patrilineal joint families have been the norm in India, though nuclear families are becoming common in urban areas. A very large majority of Indians have their marriages arranged by their parents or family elders. Marriage is thought to be for life; and the divorce rate is extremely low; less than one in a thousand marriages end in divorce. Many women marry before reaching 18, which is their legal marriageable age; child marriages are not uncommon, especially in rural areas. In large parts of Hindu northern India, moreover, a form of territorial exogamy is observed in which a bride marries out of her natal village and her parents do not visit her in her married home; the annual rite raksha bandhan , during which married women return to their natal homes, has served both to affirm bonds with their natal families and offer a recourse in times of marital stress. Visual art India has a very ancient tradition of art, which has exchanged many influences with the rest of Eurasia , especially in the first millennium. During this period Buddhist art spread with Indian religions to Central , East and Southeast Asia , the last also greatly influenced by Hindu art. Thousands of seals from the Indus Valley civilisation of the third millennium BCE have been found, usually carved with animals, but also some with human figures. The Pashupati seal , excavated in Mohenjo-daro , Pakistan, in 1928–29, is the best known. Virtually no art survives from a long period following the Indus Valley Civilisation. Almost all surviving ancient Indian art thereafter is in various forms of religious sculpture in durable materials, or coins. There was probably originally far more in wood, which is lost. In north India Mauryan art is the first imperial movement. Over the following centuries a distinctly Indian style of sculpting the human figure developed, with less interest in articulating precise anatomy than ancient Greek sculpture but showing smoothly flowing forms expressing prana ("breath" or life-force). This is often complicated by the need to give figures multiple arms or heads, or represent different genders on the left and right of figures, as with the Ardhanarishvara form of Shiva and Parvati . Most of the earliest large sculpture is Buddhist, either excavated from Buddhist stupas such as Sanchi , Sarnath and Amaravati , or is rock cut reliefs at sites such as Ajanta , Karla and Ellora . Hindu and Jain sites appear rather later. In spite of this complex mixture of religious traditions, generally, the prevailing artistic style at any time and place has been shared by the major religious groups, and sculptors probably usually served all communities. Gupta art , at its peak c. 300 CE – c. 500 CE , is often regarded as a classical period whose influence lingered for many centuries after; it saw a new dominance of Hindu sculpture, as at the Elephanta Caves . Across the north, this became rather stiff and formulaic after c. 800 CE , though rich with finely carved detail in the surrounds of statues. But in the South, under the Pallava and Chola dynasties , sculpture in both stone and bronze had a sustained period of great achievement ; the large bronzes with Shiva as Nataraja have become an iconic symbol of India. Ancient paintings have only survived at a few sites, of which the crowded scenes of court life in the Ajanta Caves are some of the most important. Painted manuscripts of religious texts survive from Eastern India from 10th century onwards, most of the earliest being Buddhist and later Jain. These significantly influenced later artistic styles. The Persian-derived Deccan painting , starting just before the Mughal miniature , between them give the first large body of secular painting, with an emphasis on portraits, and the recording of princely pleasures and wars. The style spread to Hindu courts, especially among the Rajputs , and developed a variety of styles, with the smaller courts often the most innovative, with figures such as Nihâl Chand and Nainsukh . As a market developed among European residents, it was supplied by Company painting by Indian artists with considerable Western influence. In the 19th century, cheap Kalighat paintings of gods and everyday life, done on paper, were urban folk art from Calcutta , which later saw the Bengal School of Art , reflecting the art colleges founded by the British, the first movement in modern Indian painting . Mathematics Significant mathematics began in India in the first millennium BCE. The Śulba Sūtras (literally, "Aphorisms of the Chords" in Vedic Sanskrit ) (c. 700–400 BCE) contain the earliest extant verbal expression of the Pythagorean theorem (although very likely it had been known to the Old Babylonians .) All mathematical works were orally transmitted until approximately 500 BCE; thereafter, they were transmitted both orally and in manuscript form. The oldest extant mathematical document produced on the Indian subcontinent is the birch bark Bakhshali manuscript from the 7th century CE. In the classical period of Indian mathematics (400 CE to 1200 CE), important contributions were made by Aryabhata , Brahmagupta , Bhaskara II , Varāhamihira , and Madhava . The decimal number system in use today was first recorded in Indian mathematics. Indian mathematicians made early contributions to the study of the concept of zero as a number, negative numbers , arithmetic , and algebra . Trigonometry was further advanced in India, and the modern definitions of sine and cosine were developed there. These mathematical concepts were transmitted to the Middle East, China, and Europe. A later landmark in Indian mathematics was the development of the series expansions for trigonometric functions (sine, cosine, and arc tangent ) by mathematicians of the Kerala school in the 15th century CE. Their work, completed two centuries before the invention of calculus in Europe, provided the first example of a power series . In the modern era Srinivasa Ramanujan made fundamental contributions to number theory . Music India contains a wide array of musical practices, including many different folk musics from different regions. Indian classical music has Vedic origins, and split in the 13th century into the two main traditions of Hindustani and Carnatic music. Hindustani is associated with North India and is more improvisational , featuring instruments such as the sitar and tabla , and Carnatic is South Indian and more focused on written compositions such as the kriti , while both styles contain common elements such as the raga melodic framework and tala rhythmic meter. Indian music has influenced western genres, including rock and jazz musicians during the 1960s counterculture . Indian film music is music written for Indian cinema , generally composed by music directors and sung by playback singers . Modern Indian pop takes influences from classical, folk, and western pop music. Dance Dance in India has drawn heavily from Indian classical dance traditions. Many of these in turn arose in temples or other religious contexts. Their sponsorship and promotion, however, has continued in secular, modern India. India also has local and modern dance traditions. Whether a dance is classical is determined by the Sangeet Natak Academi , the Indian government's organisation for performing arts. Although more dances could perhaps meet the criteria for classical, the Akademi has chosen eight. The best-known classical dance is Bharatnatyam, which began in the temple dances of Tamil devadasis . Identified with "prostitutes and courtesans", their dancing was formally banned in 1947. Concurrently, the dance was rehabilitated as a "pure" art form, with Rukmini Devi Arundale as a prominent figure. A devdasi who went on to attain national and international prominence was Thanjavur Balasaraswati . Some sources consider the dance-dramas Chhau of Jharkhand , West Bengal , and Odisha and Yakshagana of Karnataka to also belong to the classical tradition. Local dance traditions vary widely across India. In addition to the dance-dramas Chhau and Yakshagana, they include dance-dramas Raslila of western Uttar Pradesh and Terukkuttu of Tamil Nadu; calendrical and festival dances such as the Bhangra of Punjab, especially at Vaisakhi , the onset of spring, and Garba of Gujarat during Navratri ; and tribal or Adivasi dances, such as those of the Santal and Toda people , the latter, for example, in honour of the god Ön who brought buffalo to earth. Among 20th-century directions is the modern dance of Uday Shankar in which classical styles were employed but not adhered to rigidly. Examples are dance-dramas based on the ancient Indian animal fables , Panchatantra , and Nehru's mid-century meditation on Indian history, The Discovery of India . Dance has been an essential aspect of Indian films from the first talkies of the 1930s. The individual and group dances of Bollywood , for example, show a broad range of influences, including classical, local, and Western popular dance. Towards the end of the 20th century, innovations in British South Asian music and dance, such as Post-Bhangra , fed back into dance in India. Clothing From ancient times until the advent of the modern, the most widely worn traditional dress in India was draped . For women it took the form of a sari , a single piece of cloth many yards long. The sari was traditionally wrapped around the lower body and the shoulder. In its modern form, it is combined with an underskirt, or Indian petticoat , and tucked in along the waist band for more secure fastening. It is also commonly worn with an Indian blouse , or choli , which serves as the primary upper-body garment, the sari's end—passing over the shoulder—covering the midriff and obscuring the upper body's contours. For men, a similar but shorter length of cloth, the dhoti , has served as a lower-body garment. The use of stitched clothes became widespread after Muslim rule was established by the Delhi sultanate ( c. 1300 CE ) and continued by the Mughal Empire ( c. 1525 CE ). Among the garments introduced during this time and still commonly worn are: the shalwars and pyjamas , both styles of trousers, and the tunics kurta and kameez . Shalwars are atypically wide at the waist but narrow to a cuffed bottom. They are held up by a drawstring, which causes them to become pleated around the waist. When the pants are cut quite narrow, on the bias , they are called churidars . The kameez is a long shirt or tunic. Its side seams left open below the waistline. The kurta is traditionally collarless and made of cotton or silk; it is worn plain or with embroidered decoration, such as chikankari ; and typically falls to either just above or just below the wearer's knees. In the last 50 years, fashions have changed a great deal in India. Increasingly, in urban northern India, the sari is no longer the apparel of everyday wear, though they remain popular on formal occasions. The traditional shalwar kameez is rarely worn by younger urban women, who favour churidars or jeans. In office settings, ubiquitous air conditioning allows men to wear sports jackets year-round. For weddings and formal occasions, men in the middle and upper classes often wear bandhgala, or short Nehru jackets , with pants, with the groom and his groomsmen sporting sherwanis and churidars. Cuisine The foundation of a typical Indian meal is a cereal cooked plainly and complemented with savoury dishes. The cooked cereal could be steamed rice; chapati , a thin unleavened bread; idli , a steamed breakfast cake; or dosa , a griddled pancake. The savoury dishes might include lentils , pulses , vegetables, meat, poultry and fish commonly spiced with ginger and garlic , but also coriander , cumin , turmeric , cinnamon , cardamom and others. In some instances, the ingredients may be mixed during the cooking process. India has distinctive vegetarian cuisines, each a feature of the geographical and cultural histories of its adherents. About 20% to 39% of India's population consists of vegetarians. Although meat is eaten widely, the proportional consumption of meat is low. The most significant import of cooking techniques into India during the last millennium occurred during the Mughal Empire , spreading into northern India from regions to its northwest, along with dishes such as pilaf . Onions, garlic, almonds, and spices were added to the simple yogurt marinade of Persia. Rice was partially cooked and layered alternately with sauteed meat, the pot sealed tightly, and slow cooked according to another Persian cooking technique, to produce biryani , a feature of festive dining in many parts of India. The diversity of Indian food served worldwide has been partially concealed by the dominance of Punjabi cuisine . The popularity of tandoori chicken —cooked in a tandoor oven, which had traditionally been used for baking bread in the rural Punjab and the Delhi region, especially among Muslims, but which is originally from Central Asia —dates to the 1950s, and was caused in large part by an entrepreneurial response among people from the Punjab who had been displaced by the 1947 partition. Sports Several traditional indigenous sports such as kabaddi , kho kho , pehlwani and gilli-danda , and also martial arts , such as Kalarippayattu and marma adi remain popular. Chess is commonly held to have originated in India as chaturaṅga ; There has been a rise in the number of Indian grandmasters . Viswanathan Anand became the undisputed Chess World Champion in 2007 and held the status until 2013. Parcheesi is derived from Pachisi another traditional Indian pastime, which in early modern times was played on a giant marble court by Mughal emperor Akbar . Cricket is the most popular sport in India. India is one of the more successful cricket teams, having won two Cricket World Cups , three T20 World Cups , and three Champions Trophies . India has won a record eight field hockey gold medals in the summer Olympics . See also Outline of India Notes References Bibliography Overview "India" . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . "Country Profile: India" (PDF) . Library of Congress Country Studies (5th ed.). Library of Congress Federal Research Division . December 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 30 September 2011 . Heitzman, James; Worden, Robert L. (1996). India: A Country Study . Area Handbook Series. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress . ISBN 978-0-8444-0833-0 . Provisional Population Totals Paper 1 of 2011 India . Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner . Archived from the original on 9 September 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . Robinson, Francis, ed. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and the Maldives (1989) Constituent Assembly of India – Volume XII . National Informatics Centre , Government of India . 24 January 1950. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 17 July 2011 . Etymology Barrow, Ian J. (2003). "From Hindustan to India: Naming change in changing names". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies . 26 (1): 37– 49. doi : 10.1080/085640032000063977 . Clémentin-Ojha, Catherine (2014). " 'India, that is Bharat...': One Country, Two Names" . South Asia Multidisciplinary Academic Journal . 10 . doi : 10.4000/samaj.3717 . Archived from the original on 28 September 2015. Thieme, P. (1970). "Sanskrit sindu-/Sindhu- and Old Iranian hindu-/Hindu- ". In Mary Boyce; Ilya Gershevitch (eds.). W. B. Henning Memorial Volume . Lund Humphries . ISBN 978-0-85331-255-0 . History Asher, C. B.; Talbot, C. (2006). India Before Europe . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-80904-7 . Asher, C. B.; Talbot, C. (2008). India Before Europe t . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-51750-8 . Asher, C. B.; Talbot, C. (2022). India Before Europe . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-1-108-42816-3 . Brown, J. M. (1994). Modern India: The Origins of an Asian Democracy . The Short Oxford History of the Modern World (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-873113-9 . Coningham, Robin; Young, Ruth (2015). The Archaeology of South Asia: From the Indus to Asoka, c. 6500 BCE – 200 CE . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-84697-4 . Copland, I. (2001). India 1885–1947: The Unmaking of an Empire . Longman . ISBN 978-0-582-38173-5 . Doniger, Wendy (2014). On Hinduism . Oxford University Press . pp. xviii, 10. ISBN 978-0-19-936009-3 . Elverskog, Johan (2020). The Buddha's Footprint: An Environmental History of Asia . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-5183-8 . Flood, Gavin D. (1996). An Introduction to Hinduism . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-43878-0 . Gilbert, Marc Jason (2017). South Asia in World History . The New Oxford World History series. Oxford University Press. pp. 54– 56. ISBN 978-0-19-517653-7 . Judd, Denis (2004). The Lion and the Tiger: The Rise and Fall of the British Raj, 1600–1947 . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. Pp. xiii, 280. ISBN 978-0-19-280358-0 . Kulke, H. ; Rothermund, D. (2004). A History of India . 4th. Routledge . ISBN 978-0-415-32920-0 . Kulke, H. ; Rothermund, D. (2016). A History of India . 6th. Routledge . ISBN 978-1-138-96114-2 . Lowe, John J. (2015). Participles in Rigvedic Sanskrit: The Syntax and Semantics of Adjectival Verb Forms . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-100505-3 . Ludden, D. (2002). India and South Asia: A Short History . Oneworld Publications . ISBN 978-1-85168-237-9 . Ludden, D. (2014). India and South Asia: A Short History (2nd, revised ed.). Oneworld Publications . ISBN 978-1-85168-936-1 . Metcalf, Barbara D. ; Metcalf, Thomas R. (2006). A Concise History of Modern India (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-68225-1 . Metcalf, Barbara D.; Metcalf, Thomas R. (2012). A Concise History of Modern India . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-1-107-02649-0 . Archived from the original on 13 July 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2019 . Peers, D. M. (2006). India under Colonial Rule: 1700–1885 . Pearson Longman . ISBN 978-0-582-31738-3 . Flood, Gavin (2020). "Introduction" . In Gavin Flood (ed.). The Oxford History of Hinduism: Hindu Practice: Hindu Practice . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-105322-1 . Iori, Elisa (2023). "Releasing Urban Religion beyond the City Wall: The Spatial Capital of Early Buddhist Monasticism in NW South Asia" . Numen . 70 ( 2– 3): 184– 219. doi : 10.1163/15685276-20231691 . hdl : 10278/5079362 . Jamison, Stephanie ; Brereton, Joel (2020). The Rigveda . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-063339-4 . Mattern, Susan (2019). The Slow Moon Climbs: The Science, History, and Meaning of Menopause . Princeton, NJ, and London: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-17163-0 . Michaels, Axel (2017). Patrick Olivelle, Donald R. Davis (ed.). The Oxford History of Hinduism: Hindu Law: A New History of Dharmaśāstra . Oxford: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-100709-5 . Peers, D. M. (2013). India Under Colonial Rule: 1700–1885 . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-317-88286-2 . Retrieved 13 August 2019 . Petraglia, Michael D.; Allchin, Bridget (2007). "Human evolution and culture change in the Indian subcontinent" . In Michael Petraglia; Bridget Allchin (eds.). The Evolution and History of Human Populations in South Asia: Inter-disciplinary Studies in Archaeology, Biological Anthropology, Linguistics and Genetics . Springer Publishing . ISBN 978-1-4020-5562-1 . Possehl, G. (2003). The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective . Rowman Altamira . ISBN 978-0-7591-0172-2 . Robb, P. (2001). A History of India . Palgrave . ISBN 978-0-333-69129-8 . Robb, P. (2011). A History of India . Palgrave Macmillan . ISBN 978-0-230-34549-2 . Roy, Tirthankar (2012). India in the World Economy: From Antiquity to the Present . Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-00910-3 . Sarkar, S. (1983). Modern India: 1885–1947 . Delhi: Macmillan . ISBN 978-0-333-90425-1 . Singh, Upinder (2009). A History of Ancient and Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century . Delhi: Longman . ISBN 978-81-317-1677-9 . Singh, Upinder (2017). Political Violence in Ancient India . Harvard University Press . ISBN 978-0-674-98128-7 . Spear, Percival (1990) . History of India, Volume 2: From the sixteenth century to the twentieth century . Penguin. ISBN 978-0-140-13836-8 . Sripati, V. (1998). "Toward Fifty Years of Constitutionalism and Fundamental Rights in India: Looking Back to See Ahead (1950–2000)". American University International Law Review . 14 (2): 413– 496. Stein, B. (2010). Arnold, D. (ed.). A History of India (2nd ed.). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell . ISBN 978-1-4051-9509-6 . Witzel, Michael (2003). "Vedas and Upanișads" . In Gavin D. Flood (ed.). The Blackwell companion to Hinduism . John Wiley & Sons . ISBN 978-0-631-21535-6 . Retrieved 15 March 2012 . Wolpert, S. (2003). A New History of India (7th ed.). Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-516678-1 . Wright, Rita P. (2010). The Ancient Indus: Urbanism, Economy, and Society . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-57219-4 . Retrieved 29 September 2013 . Geography Ali, J. R.; Aitchison, J. C. (2005). "Greater India". Earth-Science Reviews . 72 ( 3– 4): 170– 173. Bibcode : 2005ESRv...72..169A . doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2005.07.005 . Basu, Mahua; Xavier, Savarimuthu (2017). Fundamentals of Environmental Studies . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-1-316-87051-8 . Chang, J. H. (1967). "The Indian Summer Monsoon". Geographical Review . 57 (3). American Geographical Society , Wiley: 373– 396. Bibcode : 1967GeoRv..57..373C . doi : 10.2307/212640 . JSTOR 212640 . Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 with Amendments Made in 1988 (PDF) . Department of Environment and Forests, Government of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. 1988. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 25 July 2011 . Dikshit, K. R.; Schwartzberg, Joseph E. (2023). "India: Land" . Encyclopædia Britannica . pp. 1– 29. Archived from the original on 8 May 2015 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . Duff, D. (1993). Holmes Principles of Physical Geology (4th ed.). Routledge . ISBN 978-0-7487-4381-0 . Frisch, Wolfgang; Meschede, Martin; Blakey, Ronald (2011). Plate Tectonics: Continental Drift and Mountain Building . Heidelberg: Springer. doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-76504-2 . ISBN 978-3-540-76503-5 . Kaul, R. N. (1970). "The Indian Subcontinent: Indo-Pakistan". In Kaul, R. N. (ed.). Afforestation in Arid Zones . The Hague: Dr. W. Junk, N.V., Publishers. ISBN 978-94-010-3352-7 . Kumar, V. Sanil; Pathak, K. C.; Pednekar, P.; Raju, N. S. N.; Gowthaman, R. (2006). "Coastal processes along the Indian coastline" (PDF) . Current Science . 91 (4): 530– 536. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 September 2009. Mcgrail, Sean; Blue, Lucy; Kentley, Eric; Palmer, Colin (2003). Boats of South Asia . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-134-43130-4 . Molnar, Peter (2015). Plate Tectonics: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-872826-9 . India Yearbook 2007 . New Delhi: Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting , Government of India . 2007. ISBN 978-81-230-1423-4 . Posey, C. A. (1994). The Living Earth Book of Wind and Weather . Reader's Digest . ISBN 978-0-89577-625-9 . Prakash, B.; Kumar, S.; Rao, M. S.; Giri, S. C. (2000). "Holocene Tectonic Movements and Stress Field in the Western Gangetic Plains" (PDF) . Current Science . 79 (4): 438– 449. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 May 2011 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . Prasad, Ishwar (1974). "The Ecology of Vertebrates of the Indian Desert". In Mani, M. S. (ed.). Ecology and Biogeography in India . The Hague: Dr. W. Junk bv Publishers. ISBN 978-94-010-2333-7 . Biodiversity Basak, R. K. (1983). Botanical Survey of India: Account of Its Establishment, Development, and Activities . India. Department of Environment . Retrieved 20 July 2011 . Crame, J. A.; Owen, A. W. (2002). Palaeobiogeography and Biodiversity Change: The Ordovician and Mesozoic–Cenozoic Radiations . Geological Society Special Publication. Geological Society of London . ISBN 978-1-86239-106-2 . Retrieved 8 December 2011 . Karanth, K. Ullas; Gopal, Rajesh (2005). "An ecology-based policy framework for human-tiger coexistence in India". In Rosie Woodroffe; Simon Thirgood; Alan Rabinowitz (eds.). People and Wildlife, Conflict Or Co-existence? . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-53203-7 . Karanth, K. P. (2006). "Out-of-India Gondwanan Origin of Some Tropical Asian Biota" (PDF) . Current Science . 90 (6): 789– 792. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 April 2019 . Retrieved 18 May 2011 . Tritsch, M. F. (2001). Wildlife of India . London: HarperCollins . ISBN 978-0-00-711062-9 . World Conservation Monitoring Centre (1994). Groombridge, Brian (ed.). 1994 IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals . International Union for Conservation of Nature . ISBN 978-2-8317-0194-3 . Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 . Ministry of Environment and Forests , Government of India . 9 September 1972. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011 . Retrieved 25 July 2011 . Politics Banerjee, Sumanta (22 July 2005). "Civilising the BJP". Economic & Political Weekly . 40 (29): 3116– 3119. JSTOR 4416896 . Bhambhri, C. P. (1992). Politics in India, 1991–1992 . Shipra. ISBN 978-81-85402-17-8 . Retrieved 20 July 2011 . Burnell, P. J.; Calvert, P. (1999). The Resilience of Democracy: Persistent Practice, Durable Idea . Taylor & Francis . ISBN 978-0-7146-8026-2 . Retrieved 20 July 2011 . India, Press Trust of (16 May 2009). "Second UPA Win, A Crowning Glory for Sonia's Ascendancy" . Business Standard India . Press Trust of India. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 June 2009 . Chander, N. J. (2004). Coalition Politics: The Indian Experience . Concept Publishing Company. ISBN 978-81-8069-092-1 . Retrieved 20 July 2011 . Dunleavy, P.; Diwakar, R.; Dunleavy, C. (2007). The Effective Space of Party Competition (PDF) . London School of Economics and Political Science. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 October 2007 . Retrieved 27 September 2011 . Dutt, S. (1998). "Identities and the Indian State: An Overview". Third World Quarterly . 19 (3): 411– 434. doi : 10.1080/01436599814325 . Echeverri-Gent, J. (January 2002). "Politics in India's Decentred Polity" . In Ayres, A.; Oldenburg, P. (eds.). Quickening the Pace of Change . India Briefing. London: M. E. Sharpe . pp. 19–53 . ISBN 978-0-7656-0812-3 . "Current Recognised Parties" (PDF) . Election Commission of India . 14 March 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2010 . Retrieved 5 July 2010 . Madhavan, M. R. (2024). "The Lok Sabha" . In Ganguly, Sumit; Sridharan, Eshwaran (eds.). The Oxford Handbook of Indian Politics . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-889428-5 . Gledhill, A. (1970). The Republic of India: The Development of its Laws and Constitution . Greenwood . ISBN 978-0-8371-2813-9 . Retrieved 21 July 2011 . Malik, Yogendra K.; Singh, V. B. (April 1992). "Bharatiya Janata Party: An Alternative to the Congress (I)?". Asian Survey . 32 (4): 318– 336. doi : 10.2307/2645149 . JSTOR 2645149 . Mathew, K. M. (2003). Manorama Yearbook . Malayala Manorama . ISBN 978-81-900461-8-3 . Retrieved 21 July 2011 . "National Symbols" . Know India . National Informatics Centre , Government of India . Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . Neuborne, Burt (2003). "The Supreme Court of India" . International Journal of Constitutional Law . 1 (3): 476– 510. doi : 10.1093/icon/1.3.476 . Pylee, M. V. (2003a). "The Longest Constitutional Document" . Constitutional Government in India (2nd ed.). S. Chand . ISBN 978-81-219-2203-6 . Pylee, M. V. (2003b). "The Union Judiciary: The Supreme Court" . Constitutional Government in India (2nd ed.). S. Chand . ISBN 978-81-219-2203-6 . Retrieved 2 November 2007 . Sarkar, N. I. (2007). Sonia Gandhi: Tryst with India . Atlantic . ISBN 978-81-269-0744-1 . Retrieved 20 July 2011 . Sharma, R. (1950). "Cabinet Government in India". Parliamentary Affairs . 4 (1): 116– 126. doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.pa.a052755 . Sharma, B. K. (2007). Introduction to the Constitution of India (4th ed.). Prentice Hall . ISBN 978-81-203-3246-1 . Sinha, A. (2004). "The Changing Political Economy of Federalism in India". India Review . 3 (1): 25– 63. doi : 10.1080/14736480490443085 . Wheare, K. C. (1980). Federal Government (4th ed.). Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-313-22702-8 . Foreign relations and military Alford, P. (7 July 2008). "G8 Plus 5 Equals Power Shift" . The Australian . Retrieved 21 November 2009 . Behera, L. K. (7 March 2011). Budgeting for India's Defence: An Analysis of Defence Budget 2011–2012 . Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses . Archived from the original on 3 April 2015 . Retrieved 4 April 2011 . Russia Agrees India Nuclear Deal . BBC News . 11 February 2009. Archived from the original on 11 October 2010 . Retrieved 22 August 2010 . Curry, B. (27 June 2010). "Canada Signs Nuclear Deal with India" . The Globe and Mail . Archived from the original on 25 May 2017 . Retrieved 13 May 2011 . "EU-India Strategic Partnership" . Europa: Summaries of EU Legislation . European Union . 8 April 2008. Archived from the original on 3 May 2011 . Retrieved 14 January 2011 . Ghosh, A. (2009). India's Foreign Policy . Pearson . ISBN 978-81-317-1025-8 . Gilbert, M. (2002). A History of the Twentieth Century . William Morrow . ISBN 978-0-06-050594-3 . Retrieved 22 July 2011 . Kumar, A. V. (1 May 2010). "Reforming the NPT to Include India" . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . Archived from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 1 November 2010 . Miglani, S. (28 February 2011). "With An Eye on China, India Steps Up Defence Spending" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 2 May 2011 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 . Nair, V. K. (2007). "No More Ambiguity: India's Nuclear Policy" (PDF) . afsa.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved 7 June 2007 . Pandit, Rajat (27 July 2009). "N-Submarine to Give India Crucial Third Leg of Nuke Triad" . The Times of India . Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 10 March 2010 . Pandit, Rajat (8 January 2015). "Make-in-India: Plan to develop 5th-generation fighter aircraft" . The Times of India . Archived from the original on 11 March 2015 . Retrieved 17 October 2021 . Pandit, Rajat (16 March 2021). "India's weapon imports fell by 33% in last five years but remains world's second-largest arms importer" . The Times of India . Archived from the original on 7 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 February 2022 . Pandit, Rajat (1 February 2022). "Strong push for indigenous weapons amidst modest hike in defence budget" . The Times of India . Retrieved 3 February 2022 . Perkovich, G. (2001). India's Nuclear Bomb: The Impact on Global Proliferation . University of California Press . ISBN 978-0-520-23210-5 . Retrieved 22 July 2011 . India, France Agree on Civil Nuclear Cooperation . Rediff . 25 January 2008. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011 . Retrieved 22 August 2010 . "UK, India Sign Civil Nuclear Accord" . Reuters . 13 February 2010. Archived from the original on 12 May 2012 . Retrieved 22 August 2010 . Rothermund, D. (2000). The Routledge Companion to Decolonization . Routledge Companions to History. Routledge . ISBN 978-0-415-35632-9 . Sharma, S. R. (1999). India–USSR Relations 1947–1971: From Ambivalence to Steadfastness . Vol. 1. Discovery. ISBN 978-81-7141-486-4 . Sisodia, N. S.; Naidu, G. V. C. (2005). Changing Security Dynamic in Eastern Asia: Focus on Japan . Promilla. ISBN 978-81-86019-52-8 . "India, US Sign 123 Agreement" . The Times of India . 11 October 2008. Archived from the original on 7 November 2011 . Retrieved 21 July 2011 . Economy Alamgir, J. (2008). India's Open-Economy Policy: Globalism, Rivalry, Continuity . Taylor & Francis . ISBN 978-0-415-77684-4 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 . Bonner, B (20 March 2010). "Make Way, World. India Is on the Move" . The Christian Science Monitor . Archived from the original on 5 August 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 . Farrell, D.; Beinhocker, E. (19 May 2007). Next Big Spenders: India's Middle Class . McKinsey & Company . Archived from the original on 5 December 2011 . Retrieved 17 September 2011 . Gargan, E. A. (15 August 1992). "India Stumbles in Rush to a Free Market Economy" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 8 February 2011 . Retrieved 22 July 2011 . Hawksworth, John; Tiwari, Anmol (January 2011). The World in 2050: The Accelerating Shift of Global Economic Power: Challenges and Opportunities (PDF) . PricewaterhouseCoopers . Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 . Nayak, P. B.; Goldar, B.; Agrawal, P. (2010). India's Economy and Growth: Essays in Honour of V. K. R. V. Rao . SAGE Publications . ISBN 978-81-321-0452-0 . Pal, P.; Ghosh, J (July 2007). "Inequality in India: A Survey of Recent Trends" (PDF) . DESA Working Paper No. 45 . United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs . Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 . Schwab, K. (2010). The Global Competitiveness Report 2010–2011 (PDF) . World Economic Forum . Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 December 2010 . Retrieved 10 May 2011 . Sheth, N. (28 May 2009). "Outlook for Outsourcing Spending Brightens" . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 3 October 2010 . Yep, E. (27 September 2011). "ReNew Wind Power Gets $201 Million Goldman Investment" . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 27 September 2011 . "India Second Fastest Growing Auto Market After China" . Business Line . 10 April 2010. Archived from the original on 30 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 . "India world's second largest textiles exporter: UN Comtrade" . The Economic Times . 2 June 2014. Archived from the original on 5 June 2014 . Retrieved 17 October 2021 . "India's Economy: Not Just Rubies and Polyester Shirts" . The Economist . 8 October 2011. Archived from the original on 22 October 2018 . Retrieved 9 October 2011 . "Indian Car Exports Surge 36%" . Express India . 13 October 2009. Archived from the original on 28 April 2016 . Retrieved 5 April 2016 . "Measuring the cost of living worldwide" . The Economist . 21 March 2017. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017 . Retrieved 25 May 2017 . Economic Survey of India 2007: Policy Brief (PDF) . Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development . October 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 June 2011 . Retrieved 22 July 2011 . India: Undernourished Children – A Call for Reform and Action . World Bank . Archived from the original on 7 May 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 . Indian IT-BPO Industry . NASSCOM . 2011–2012. Archived from the original on 9 May 2012 . Retrieved 22 June 2012 . Understanding the WTO: The Organization Members and Observers . World Trade Organization . 1995. Archived from the original on 29 December 2009 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 . World Economic Outlook Update . International Monetary Fund . June 2011. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016 . Retrieved 22 July 2011 . Demographics Chandramouli, C. (15 July 2011). Rural Urban Distribution of Population (PDF) . Ministry of Home Affairs (India) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 March 2015 . Retrieved 24 January 2015 . Dharwadker, A. (2010). "Representing India's Pasts: Time, Culture, and Problems of Performance Historiography" . In Canning, C. M.; Postlewait, T. (eds.). Representing the Past: Essays in Performance Historiography . University of Iowa Press . ISBN 978-1-58729-905-6 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 . Drèze, J.; Goyal, A. (2009). "The Future of Mid-Day Meals" . In Baru, R. V. (ed.). School Health Services in India: The Social and Economic Contexts . SAGE Publications . ISBN 978-81-7829-873-3 . Dyson, T.; Visaria, P. (2005). "Migration and Urbanisation: Retrospect and Prospects" . In Dyson, T.; Casses, R.; Visaria, L. (eds.). Twenty-First Century India: Population, Economy, Human Development, and the Environment . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-928382-8 . Dyson, Tim (2018). A Population History of India: From the First Modern People to the Present Day . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-882905-8 . Archived from the original on 25 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 July 2019 . Fisher, Michael H. (2018). An Environmental History of India: From Earliest Times to the Twenty-First Century . Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press . doi : 10.1017/9781316276044 . ISBN 978-1-107-11162-2 . LCCN 2018021693 . Archived from the original on 25 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 July 2019 . Garg, S. C. (19 April 2005). Mobilizing Urban Infrastructure Finance in India (PDF) . World Bank . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 August 2009 . Retrieved 27 January 2010 . Mallikarjun, B (November 2004). "Fifty Years of Language Planning for Modern Hindi – The Official Language of India" . Language in India . 4 (11). Archived from the original on 10 January 2018 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 . Ottenheimer, H. J. (2008). The Anthropology of Language: An Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology . Cengage . ISBN 978-0-495-50884-7 . Ratna, U. (2007). "Interface Between Urban and Rural Development in India" . In Dutt, A. K.; Thakur, B. (eds.). City, Society, and Planning . Vol. 1. Concept. ISBN 978-81-8069-459-2 . Rorabacher, J. A. (2010). Hunger and Poverty in South Asia . Gyan. ISBN 978-81-212-1027-0 . Smith, Peter (2008). An Introduction to the Baha'i Faith . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86251-6 . Archived from the original on 10 March 2025 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Notification No. 2/8/60-O.L . Ministry of Home Affairs , Government of India . 27 April 1960. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014 . Retrieved 13 May 2011 . "Census Data 2001" . Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner . Ministry of Home Affairs , Government of India . 2010–2011. Archived from the original on 12 August 2011 . Retrieved 22 July 2011 . Culture Asher, Catherine B. (1992). Architecture of Mughal India . New Cambridge History of India series. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press . doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521267281 . ISBN 978-0-521-26728-1 . Béteille, André (2002). "Caste" . In Barnard, Alan; Spencer, Jonathan (eds.). Encyclopedia of Social and Cultural Anthropology . New York; London: Routledge . ISBN 978-0-415-28558-2 . Binmore, K. G. (2007). Playing for Real: A Text on Game Theory . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-530057-4 . Blurton, T. Richard (1993). Hindu Art . Harvard University Press . ISBN 978-0-674-39189-5 . Bourbaki, Nicolas (1998). Elements of the History of Mathematics . Berlin, Heidelberg, and New York: Springer-Verlag , 301 pages. ISBN 978-3-540-64767-6 . Craven, Roy C (1997). Indian art: a concise history . New York City: Thames & Hudson . ISBN 978-0-500-20302-6 . OCLC 37895110 . Cullen-Dupont, K. (July 2009). Human Trafficking . Infobase Publishing . ISBN 978-0-8160-7545-4 . Filliozat, Pierre-Sylvain (2004). "Ancient Sanskrit Mathematics: An Oral Tradition and a Written Literature" . In Chemla, Karine ; Cohen, Robert S.; Renn, Jürgen; et al. (eds.). History of Science, History of Text (Boston Series in the Philosophy of Science) . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 254 pages, pp. 137–157. pp. 360– 375. doi : 10.1007/1-4020-2321-9_7 . ISBN 978-1-4020-2320-0 . . Harle, James C. (1994). The Art and Architecture of the Indian Subcontinent . Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-06217-5 . Hayashi, Takao (2005). "Indian Mathematics". In Flood, Gavin (ed.). The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism . Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 616 pages, pp. 360–375. pp. 360– 375. ISBN 978-1-4051-3251-0 . . Hayashi, Takao (1995). The Bakhshali Manuscript, An ancient Indian mathematical treatise . Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 596 pages. ISBN 978-90-6980-087-5 . . Ifrah, Georges (2000). A Universal History of Numbers: From Prehistory to Computers . New York: Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-39340-5 . Jones, G.; Ramdas, K. (2005). (Un)tying the Knot: Ideal and Reality in Asian Marriage . National University of Singapore Press . ISBN 978-981-05-1428-0 . Kiple, K. F.; Ornelas, K. C., eds. (2000). The Cambridge World History of Food . Vol. 2. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-40215-6 . Kuiper, K., ed. (2010). The Culture of India . Britannica Educational Publishing . ISBN 978-1-61530-203-1 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 . Makar, E. M. (2007). An American's Guide to Doing Business in India . Adams. ISBN 978-1-59869-211-2 . Medora, N. (2003). "Mate Selection in Contemporary India: Love Marriages Versus Arranged Marriages". In Hamon, R. R.; Ingoldsby, B. B. (eds.). Mate Selection Across Cultures . SAGE Publications . pp. 209– 230. ISBN 978-0-7619-2592-7 . Michell, George (2000). Hindu Art and Architecture . Thames & Hudson . ISBN 978-0-500-20337-8 . Pingree, David (2003). "The logic of non-Western science: mathematical discoveries in medieval India". Daedalus . 132 (4): 45– 54. doi : 10.1162/001152603771338779 . . Plofker, K. (2007). "Mathematics of India". In Katz, Victor J. (ed.). The Mathematics of Egypt, Mesopotamia, China, India, and Islam: A Sourcebook . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp. 385– 514. ISBN 978-0-691-11485-9 . . Plofker, Kim (2009). Mathematics in India: 500 BCE–1800 CE . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-12067-6 . . Roger, Delphine. " The Middle East and South Asia (in Chapter: History and Culture of Food and Drink in Asia) ". In Kiple & Ornelas (2000) , pp. 1140–1150. Rowland, Benjamin (1970). The Art and Architecture of India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain . Penguin Books . ISBN 978-0-14-056102-9 . Stillwell, John (2004). Mathematics and its History . Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics (2 ed.). Springer, Berlin and New York, 568 pages. doi : 10.1007/978-1-4684-9281-1 . ISBN 978-0-387-95336-6 . . Tarlo, E. (1996). Clothing Matters: Dress and Identity in India . University of Chicago Press . ISBN 978-0-226-78976-7 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 . Anand Crowned World Champion . Rediff . 29 October 2008. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 29 October 2008 . External links Government Official website of the Government of India Government of India Web Directory General information India Archived 11 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . India web resources provided by GovPubs at the University of Colorado Boulder Libraries India from BBC News Wikimedia Atlas of India Geographic data related to India at OpenStreetMap Key Development Forecasts for India from International Futures 21°N 78°E ﻿ / ﻿ 21°N 78°E ﻿ / 21; 78